So we can create that union
type as we did before, right?
We're using the or operator here,
I explained the casting a little bit.
You're going to see union
types a lot in your programs.
And the main reason for
that has to do with control flow.
So we talked a little bit about
explicitly typing function return values.
But anytime you have a branch like this,
where we have a coin flip and
it's either heads or it's tails,
those are two different branches within
your function, right, there's an if-else.
If we wanted to represent this as,
not just returning a string like this, but
we could say, this returns heads or
tails, there you go.
So this is like, when thinking
about union and intersection types,
it's so
much more common to see these union types.
I expect in your day-to-day
use of TypeScript,
it's gonna be at least
like a 100 to 1 ratio.
These are overwhelmingly
the more common thing.
And it just has to do with control flow
and different possibilities happening,
depending on which branch of
code you end up going down.
So here's a more complicated example,
so here's heads or tails.
In fact, we could do this more,
aah, I'll leave it the way it is.
You could also do this
just to see like this.
This would let it infer that it's not
just a string, it's the string tails.
So here's the outcome of a coin flip.
Now, let's look at a slightly
more complicated example,
and this is gonna build on what we
saw in the last chapter with tuples.
Remember, I told you I use tuples of
size 2 all the time in my programs?
Here's an example.
So I, let's say, I have some random
processing task like, let's say, adding
a user to my address book, and maybe
this involves an API call or something.
So I've got a success and a fail example,
a successful result and a failing result.
The first element of the tupple is
the string success, or the string error.
And then depending on which
case I'm dealing with,
we could end up with this
object that has name and email.
Or we could end up with, literally,
like an instance of the error class,
something that might be thrown.
So let's define a function
called maybeGetUserInfo.
Which flips a coin and
if we get heads, it'll return success,
if we get tails,
it will return the failure result.
And we can see in the outcome here,
we've got, here's the success type.
There's that tupple,
here's the string, here's the object.
And then here's the failing case,
it's error, and
then here's my instance of error,
that's the type error.
So, Great,
we can represent this as a tuple.
But, Outcome2.,
All right, so I've got my array here,
I've got a 0 position and a 1 position, so
it knows I've got two elements there.
Let's reach for number 1.
What do we got there?
Literally, just the property name.
That's all I can access on this thing,
name.
And that's because while I
have a name here, right,
errors also have a property called name.
And if we think back to our
Venn diagram here, right,
remember we said a union type allows for
any of these values to be,
whoops, to be present, that's perfect.
But in terms of what assumptions we
can make, how can we treat this?
Well, we can't be sure it's an error and
we can't be sure it's that object with
the property name and email, so you kind
of get the lowest common denominator.
You get anything that's on both and
that's just name.
So it's a very accepting type, but
it's not very useful in its current form.
And so we need to learn how
to work with types like this.
Let's introduce a bunch of functions here.
So we've got print even,
which only takes even, right?
This takes 2,468,
that's the only thing allowed here.
We've got print lowNum,
which only takes a digit OneThroughFive.
We've got printEvenNumberUnder5,
which literally,
the only thing this will be happy with
is 2 or 4, very restricted function.
And then we've got printNumber,
it'll take any number.
So that'll work with everything
we've been discussing so far,
as well as all of the doubles in
between those nice round numbers, and
all of the other doubles that
you can create in JavaScript.
So, all right,
let's create our value x, which is,
I've reversed the orders of these now,
right?
So now look at how the type
is serialized on the screen.
It's 2, 4, 6, 8, and
then the missing things from 1, 3, and 5.
So there you see evidence.
It's sort of like one by one,
putting these in.
So let's look at what this type,
evenOrLowNumber, what does it accept?
In fact, I'll leave this commented out
because it already exists somewhere,
In a higher-up example.
So it accepts an even,
it accepts a lowNumber,
it accepts an evenOrLowNumber,
very accepting.
But when we try to pass it
into these functions, well,
it's not guaranteed to be even.
And look at this.
It says, in our error,
one is not assignable to type evens.
It's almost like, it's going
through the set and it's like, 2,
you're fine, 4, you're fine,
6 and 8, both fine, 1, problem.
And then it bails.
That's enough for
it to know this will not type check.
PrintLowNumber, Well, it's okay with 2 and
4, but once it gets to 6, bails.
It says, this is not gonna work.
Just the fact that you have a 6 in there,
I don't even care about
the rest of the set.
I already know you're
not going to type check.
PrintEvenNumberUnder5, all right, 2 and 4
are fine, 6 is where it hits the problem.
And then finally,
printNumber, It's fine there.
It looks through every
element of the set and says,
looks like y'all are numbers,
I'm fine with that.
>> When you say heads and tails is
a return type, will e be a valid return?
>> Well, what be a valid return?
>> E.
>> E?
>> String error, I think you
>> Heads and
tails are a valid return type.
So, let me see if I can
answer that question.
If I've said,
I'm gonna return heads or tails, and
I do this I'm gonna get busted,
literally nothing else other than
the string heads and tails will do.
And TypeScript's even clever about trying
to correct a little misspelling that I
have here, like, did I mean tails?
So, yeah, that one,
I can answer, literally,
nothing other than this or this.
Now, I could always
return tails That's fine.
I can say, there's some possibility
that it could be heads.
Maybe I'm designing for the future where
I will introduce heads as a concept, and
I don't wanna break people
who consume this function.
They should prepare for the possibility
that heads will exist, I could do that.
But I certainly can't do anything,
like, what we would say here is that,
what we're actually
returning is just tails,
and the contract we have to
live up to is heads or tails.
And so the set, the string tails,
it fits within heads and tails,
it is type equivalent.
Next, we're going to talk about
narrowing with type cards.
Because we can see a union type allows us
to accept a variety of different values.
But as we saw earlier,
when we were looking at the second element
of our tuple up here, right,
we only had this name property.
So we're gonna talk a little bit about
how you can use a union type to do
some more useful things.
And really,
it's about narrowing with type_guards.
We mentioned type_guards a little
bit earlier in the course.
Remember, we used typeof
something equals number, or
it's not undefined, so we used typeof.
There's another built in JavaScript
concept that is regarded as
a type_guard by TypeScript, instanceof.
So I've got my first and
my second elements of this tuple.
And just remind yourselves that this was,
it's either this success or
this fail case, right?
We've got the string, and then a different
value here, depending on the string.
So, if the second element of
the tuple is an instanceof error,
note that the type in this
branch of code is error.
So we're no longer in
a place where we're saying,
I can only access this name property,
right?
Now we get the full glory of everything
that's on error, which is a stack.
Stack trace might be there,
a message and a name.
And then when we have this else block,
well, what's left?
What's left after error?
It's this object.
So you can kind of think of this
like a pie chart if you want,
where part of your pie
is like this error type,
part of your pie is this object
with a name and an email property.
And when you have a conditional like this,
you're almost taking slices of
the pie out, chunks, and saying, okay,
I'm gonna handle the possibility
that this is an error.
And then down here,
you get everything that's left that
you haven't handled specifically.
And in this case, it's this object.
But if you had more union types here,
right, if it's this object or
another object or a date,
you could use an instanceof,
you can handle all of those specifically.
And then what's left in your else block,
you'll see just anything that hasn't been
handled yet cuz that's the only
way you get to the else.
Does that make sense?
Good, okay, so
this is a way you could use a type_guard.
There's another thing you could do,
and it's called a discriminated_union.
It's a fancy name for a technique.
So we're still dealing
with that same tuple.
We still have the first and
the second element here, right?
The first element, if we look at it,
we've got success or error.
And the second element,
we've got this object or error.
But TypeScript actually has stored
more information, it's not telling us.
If we just hovered over these,
we might assume that, well,
the first could be success, and
then the second could be an error.
So maybe we'll allow success
in the first position and
an error instance in the second position.
But TypeScript knows
that it's really this.
You get this pair or the other pair,
you don't mix and match.
And we'll see that with
discriminated_unions.
So here, look at what we're doing?
We're saying, if the first is equal
to error, look at the second.
So it knows they're connected,
it knows we're in that first situation,
right, the error situation.
And down here, what's left?
A case where it's successful.
So what we would say is, this is
a discriminated_union because we're using
the first element of
the tuple as a discriminator.
We're using that as a way to,
it's almost like a signal that we can
use to sort of take a whole larger
picture, a larger scenario.
And we're using that first position as
an indicator of what the whole tuple
value must be,
depending on the first element.
It's almost like a label, right?
And as long as we don't mix, as long as
every of these two scenarios up here,
right, so we don't reuse success.
What if we did this?
It's not an effective
discriminated_union now,
cuz it's, first off,
it's never gonna be success.
I mean, it's never gonna be error, sorry.
And now we're, sorry Is that it?
Yep, but we haven't narrowed it
down to anything cuz that's for
both success and failure.
So that's how a discriminated_union works.
You use you often a literal type or
a union of literal types,
right, to serve as
an indication that you can use
to make a decision about
the larger value in and of itself.